<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 9: The Haunting of Mr. Bickersdyke</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>
				<span epub:type="subtitle">The Haunting of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke</span>
			</h2>
			<p>Anything in the nature of a rash and hasty move was wholly foreign to Psmith’s tactics. He had the patience which is the chief quality of the successful general. He was content to secure his base before making any offensive movement. It was a fortnight before he turned his attention to the education of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke. During that fortnight he conversed attractively, in the intervals of work, on the subject of League football in general and Manchester United in particular. The subject is not hard to master if one sets oneself earnestly to it; and Psmith spared no pains. The football editions of the evening papers are not reticent about those who play the game: and Psmith drank in every detail with the thoroughness of the conscientious student. By the end of the fortnight he knew what was the favourite breakfast-food of J. Turnbull; what Sandy Turnbull wore next his skin; and who, in the opinion of Meredith, was England’s leading politician. These facts, imparted to and discussed with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rossiter, made the progress of the entente cordiale rapid. It was on the eighth day that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rossiter consented to lunch with the Old Etonian. On the tenth he played the host. By the end of the fortnight the flapping of the white wings of Peace over the Postage Department was setting up a positive draught. Mike, who had been introduced by Psmith as a distant relative of Moger, the goalkeeper, was included in the great peace.</p>
			<p>“So that now,” said Psmith, reflectively polishing his eyeglass, “I think that we may consider ourselves free to attend to Comrade Bickersdyke. Our bright little Mancunian friend would no more run us in now than if we were the brothers Turnbull. We are as inside forwards to him.”</p>
			<p>The club to which Psmith and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke belonged was celebrated for the steadfastness of its political views, the excellence of its cuisine, and the curiously Gorgonzolaesque marble of its main staircase. It takes all sorts to make a world. It took about four thousand of all sorts to make the Senior Conservative Club. To be absolutely accurate, there were three thousand seven hundred and eighteen members.</p>
			<p>To <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke for the next week it seemed as if there was only one.</p>
			<p>There was nothing crude or overdone about Psmith’s methods. The ordinary man, having conceived the idea of haunting a fellow clubman, might have seized the first opportunity of engaging him in conversation. Not so Psmith. The first time he met <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke in the club was on the stairs after dinner one night. The great man, having received practical proof of the excellence of cuisine referred to above, was coming down the main staircase at peace with all men, when he was aware of a tall young man in the “faultless evening dress” of which the female novelist is so fond, who was regarding him with a fixed stare through an eyeglass. The tall young man, having caught his eye, smiled faintly, nodded in a friendly but patronizing manner, and passed on up the staircase to the library. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke sped on in search of a waiter.</p>
			<p>As Psmith sat in the library with a novel, the waiter entered, and approached him.</p>
			<p>“Beg pardon, sir,” he said. “Are you a member of this club?”</p>
			<p>Psmith fumbled in his pocket and produced his eyeglass, through which he examined the waiter, button by button.</p>
			<p>“I am Psmith,” he said simply.</p>
			<p>“A member, sir?”</p>
			<p>“<em>The</em> member,” said Psmith. “Surely you participated in the general rejoicings which ensued when it was announced that I had been elected? But perhaps you were too busy working to pay any attention. If so, I respect you. I also am a worker. A toiler, not a flatfish. A sizzler, not a squab. Yes, I am a member. Will you tell <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke that I am sorry, but I have been elected, and have paid my entrance fee and subscription.”</p>
			<p>“Thank you, sir.”</p>
			<p>The waiter went downstairs and found <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke in the lower smoking-room.</p>
			<p>“The gentleman says he is, sir.”</p>
			<p>“H’m,” said the bank-manager. “Coffee and Benedictine, and a cigar.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, sir.”</p>
			<p>On the following day <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke met Psmith in the club three times, and on the day after that seven. Each time the latter’s smile was friendly, but patronizing. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke began to grow restless.</p>
			<p>On the fourth day Psmith made his first remark. The manager was reading the evening paper in a corner, when Psmith sinking gracefully into a chair beside him, caused him to look up.</p>
			<p>“The rain keeps off,” said Psmith.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke looked as if he wished his employee would imitate the rain, but he made no reply.</p>
			<p>Psmith called a waiter.</p>
			<p>“Would you mind bringing me a small cup of coffee?” he said. “And for you,” he added to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke.</p>
			<p>“Nothing,” growled the manager.</p>
			<p>“And nothing for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke.”</p>
			<p>The waiter retired. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke became absorbed in his paper.</p>
			<p>“I see from my morning paper,” said Psmith, affably, “that you are to address a meeting at the Kenningford Town Hall next week. I shall come and hear you. Our politics differ in some respects, I fear—I incline to the Socialist view—but nevertheless I shall listen to your remarks with great interest, great interest.”</p>
			<p>The paper rustled, but no reply came from behind it.</p>
			<p>“I heard from father this morning,” resumed Psmith.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke lowered his paper and glared at him.</p>
			<p>“I don’t wish to hear about your father,” he snapped.</p>
			<p>An expression of surprise and pain came over Psmith’s face.</p>
			<p>“What!” he cried. “You don’t mean to say that there is any coolness between my father and you? I am more grieved than I can say. Knowing, as I do, what a genuine respect my father has for your great talents, I can only think that there must have been some misunderstanding. Perhaps if you would allow me to act as a mediator—”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke put down his paper and walked out of the room.</p>
			<p>Psmith found him a quarter of an hour later in the card-room. He sat down beside his table, and began to observe the play with silent interest. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke, never a great performer at the best of times, was so unsettled by the scrutiny that in the deciding game of the rubber he revoked, thereby presenting his opponents with the rubber by a very handsome majority of points. Psmith clicked his tongue sympathetically.</p>
			<p>Dignified reticence is not a leading characteristic of the bridge-player’s manner at the Senior Conservative Club on occasions like this. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke’s partner did not bear his calamity with manly resignation. He gave tongue on the instant. “What on earth’s,” and “Why on earth’s” flowed from his mouth like molten lava. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke sat and fermented in silence. Psmith clicked his tongue sympathetically throughout.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke lost that control over himself which every member of a club should possess. He turned on Psmith with a snort of frenzy.</p>
			<p>“How can I keep my attention fixed on the game when you sit staring at me like a—like a—”</p>
			<p>“I am sorry,” said Psmith gravely, “if my stare falls short in any way of your ideal of what a stare should be; but I appeal to these gentlemen. Could I have watched the game more quietly?”</p>
			<p>“Of course not,” said the bereaved partner warmly. “Nobody could have any earthly objection to your behaviour. It was absolute carelessness. I should have thought that one might have expected one’s partner at a club like this to exercise elementary—”</p>
			<p>But <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke had gone. He had melted silently away like the driven snow.</p>
			<p>Psmith took his place at the table.</p>
			<p>“A somewhat nervous excitable man, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke, I should say,” he observed.</p>
			<p>“A somewhat dashed, blanked idiot,” emended the bank-manager’s late partner. “Thank goodness he lost as much as I did. That’s some light consolation.”</p>
			<p>Psmith arrived at the flat to find Mike still out. Mike had repaired to the Gaiety earlier in the evening to refresh his mind after the labours of the day. When he returned, Psmith was sitting in an armchair with his feet on the mantelpiece, musing placidly on Life.</p>
			<p>“Well?” said Mike.</p>
			<p>“Well? And how was the Gaiety? Good show?”</p>
			<p>“Jolly good. What about Bickersdyke?”</p>
			<p>Psmith looked sad.</p>
			<p>“I cannot make Comrade Bickersdyke out,” he said. “You would think that a man would be glad to see the son of a personal friend. On the contrary, I may be wronging Comrade B., but I should almost be inclined to say that my presence in the Senior Conservative Club tonight irritated him. There was no onhomie in his manner. He seemed to me to be giving a spirited imitation of a man about to foam at the mouth. I did my best to entertain him. I chatted. His only reply was to leave the room. I followed him to the card-room, and watched his very remarkable and brainy tactics at bridge, and he accused me of causing him to revoke. A very curious personality, that of Comrade Bickersdyke. But let us dismiss him from our minds. Rumours have reached me,” said Psmith, “that a very decent little supper may be obtained at a quaint, old-world eating-house called the Savoy. Will you accompany me thither on a tissue-restoring expedition? It would be rash not to probe these rumours to their foundation, and ascertain their exact truth.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
