<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 12: In a Nutshell</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">In a Nutshell</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke sat in his private room at the New Asiatic Bank with a pile of newspapers before him. At least, the casual observer would have said that it was <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke. In reality, however, it was an active volcano in the shape and clothes of the bank manager. It was freely admitted in the office that morning that the manager had lowered all records with ease. The staff had known him to be in a bad temper before⁠—frequently; but his frame of mind on all previous occasions had been, compared with his present frame of mind, that of a rather exceptionally good-natured lamb. Within ten minutes of his arrival the entire office was on the jump. The messengers were collected in a pallid group in the basement, discussing the affair in whispers and endeavouring to restore their nerve with about sixpenn’orth of the beverage known as “unsweetened.” The heads of departments, to a man, had bowed before the storm. Within the space of seven minutes and a quarter <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke had contrived to find some fault with each of them. Inward Bills was out at an <abbr class="initialism">A.B.C.</abbr> shop snatching a hasty cup of coffee, to pull him together again. Outward Bills was sitting at his desk with the glazed stare of one who has been struck in the thorax by a thunderbolt. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rossiter had been torn from Psmith in the middle of a highly technical discussion of the Manchester United match, just as he was showing⁠—with the aid of a ball of paper⁠—how he had once seen Meredith centre to Sandy Turnbull in a Cup match, and was now leaping about like a distracted grasshopper. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waller, head of the Cash Department, had been summoned to the Presence, and after listening meekly to a rush of criticism, had retired to his desk with the air of a beaten spaniel.</p>
			<p>Only one man of the many in the building seemed calm and happy⁠—Psmith.</p>
			<p>Psmith had resumed the chat about Manchester United, on <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rossiter’s return from the lion’s den, at the spot where it had been broken off; but, finding that the head of the Postage Department was in no mood for discussing football (or anything else), he had postponed his remarks and placidly resumed his work.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke picked up a paper, opened it, and began searching the columns. He had not far to look. It was a slack season for the newspapers, and his little trouble, which might have received a paragraph in a busy week, was set forth fully in three-quarters of a column.</p>
			<p>The column was headed, “Amusing Heckling.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke read a few lines, and crumpled the paper up with a snort.</p>
			<p>The next he examined was an organ of his own shade of political opinion. It too, gave him nearly a column, headed “Disgraceful Scene at Kenningford.” There was also a leaderette on the subject.</p>
			<p>The leaderette said so exactly what <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke thought himself that for a moment he was soothed. Then the thought of his grievance returned, and he pressed the bell.</p>
			<p>“Send <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Smith to me,” he said.</p>
			<p>William, the messenger, proceeded to inform Psmith of the summons.</p>
			<p>Psmith’s face lit up.</p>
			<p>“I am always glad to sweeten the monotony of toil with a chat with Little Clarence,” he said. “I shall be with him in a moment.”</p>
			<p>He cleaned his pen very carefully, placed it beside his ledger, flicked a little dust off his coatsleeve, and made his way to the manager’s room.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke received him with the ominous restraint of a tiger crouching for its spring. Psmith stood beside the table with languid grace, suggestive of some favoured confidential secretary waiting for instructions.</p>
			<p>A ponderous silence brooded over the room for some moments. Psmith broke it by remarking that the Bank Rate was unchanged. He mentioned this fact as if it afforded him a personal gratification.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke spoke.</p>
			<p>“Well, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Smith?” he said.</p>
			<p>“You wished to see me about something, sir?” inquired Psmith, ingratiatingly.</p>
			<p>“You know perfectly well what I wished to see you about. I want to hear your explanation of what occurred last night.”</p>
			<p>“May I sit, sir?”</p>
			<p>He dropped gracefully into a chair, without waiting for permission, and, having hitched up the knees of his trousers, beamed winningly at the manager.</p>
			<p>“A deplorable affair,” he said, with a shake of his head. “Extremely deplorable. We must not judge these rough, uneducated men too harshly, however. In a time of excitement the emotions of the lower classes are easily stirred. Where you or I would⁠—”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke interrupted.</p>
			<p>“I do not wish for any more buffoonery, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Smith⁠—”</p>
			<p>Psmith raised a pained pair of eyebrows.</p>
			<p>“Buffoonery, sir!”</p>
			<p>“I cannot understand what made you act as you did last night, unless you are perfectly mad, as I am beginning to think.”</p>
			<p>“But, surely, sir, there was nothing remarkable in my behaviour? When a merchant has attached himself to your collar, can you do less than smite him on the other cheek? I merely acted in self-defence. You saw for yourself⁠—”</p>
			<p>“You know what I am alluding to. Your behaviour during my speech.”</p>
			<p>“An excellent speech,” murmured Psmith courteously.</p>
			<p>“Well?” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke.</p>
			<p>“It was, perhaps, mistaken zeal on my part, sir, but you must remember that I acted purely from the best motives. It seemed to me⁠—”</p>
			<p>“That is enough, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Smith. I confess that I am absolutely at a loss to understand you⁠—”</p>
			<p>“It is too true, sir,” sighed Psmith.</p>
			<p>“You seem,” continued <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke, warming to his subject, and turning gradually a richer shade of purple, “you seem to be determined to endeavour to annoy me.” (“No no,” from Psmith.) “I can only assume that you are not in your right senses. You follow me about in my club⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Our club, sir,” murmured Psmith.</p>
			<p>“Be good enough not to interrupt me, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Smith. You dog my footsteps in my club⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Purely accidental, sir. We happen to meet⁠—that is all.”</p>
			<p>“You attend meetings at which I am speaking, and behave in a perfectly imbecile manner.”</p>
			<p>Psmith moaned slightly.</p>
			<p>“It may seem humorous to you, but I can assure you it is extremely bad policy on your part. The New Asiatic Bank is no place for humour, and I think⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Excuse me, sir,” said Psmith.</p>
			<p>The manager started at the familiar phrase. The plum colour of his complexion deepened.</p>
			<p>“I entirely agree with you, sir,” said Psmith, “that this bank is no place for humour.”</p>
			<p>“Very well, then. You⁠—”</p>
			<p>“And I am never humorous in it. I arrive punctually in the morning, and I work steadily and earnestly till my labours are completed. I think you will find, on inquiry, that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rossiter is satisfied with my work.”</p>
			<p>“That is neither here nor⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Surely, sir,” said Psmith, “you are wrong? Surely your jurisdiction ceases after office hours? Any little misunderstanding we may have at the close of the day’s work cannot affect you officially. You could not, for instance, dismiss me from the service of the bank if we were partners at bridge at the club and I happened to revoke.”</p>
			<p>“I can dismiss you, let me tell you, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Smith, for studied insolence, whether in the office or not.”</p>
			<p>“I bow to superior knowledge,” said Psmith politely, “but I confess I doubt it. And,” he added, “there is another point. May I continue to some extent?”</p>
			<p>“If you have anything to say, say it.”</p>
			<p>Psmith flung one leg over the other, and settled his collar.</p>
			<p>“It is perhaps a delicate matter,” he said, “but it is best to be frank. We should have no secrets. To put my point quite clearly, I must go back a little, to the time when you paid us that very welcome weekend visit at our house in August.”</p>
			<p>“If you hope to make capital out of the fact that I have been a guest of your father⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Not at all,” said Psmith deprecatingly. “Not at all. You do not take me. My point is this. I do not wish to revive painful memories, but it cannot be denied that there was, here and there, some slight bickering between us on that occasion. The fault,” said Psmith magnanimously, “was possibly mine. I may have been too exacting, too capricious. Perhaps so. However, the fact remains that you conceived the happy notion of getting me into this bank, under the impression that, once I was in, you would be able to⁠—if I may use the expression⁠—give me beans. You said as much to me, if I remember. I hate to say it, but don’t you think that if you give me the sack, although my work is satisfactory to the head of my department, you will be by way of admitting that you bit off rather more than you could chew? I merely make the suggestion.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke half rose from his chair.</p>
			<p>“You⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Just so, just so, but⁠—to return to the main point⁠—don’t you? The whole painful affair reminds me of the story of Agesilaus and the Petulant Pterodactyl, which as you have never heard, I will now proceed to relate. Agesilaus⁠—”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke made a curious clucking noise in his throat.</p>
			<p>“I am boring you,” said Psmith, with ready tact. “Suffice it to say that Comrade Agesilaus interfered with the pterodactyl, which was doing him no harm; and the intelligent creature, whose motto was <i xml:lang="la">‘Nemo me impune lacessit,’</i> turned and bit him. Bit him good and hard, so that Agesilaus ever afterwards had a distaste for pterodactyls. His reluctance to disturb them became quite a byword. The society papers of the period frequently commented upon it. Let us draw the parallel.”</p>
			<p>Here <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke, who had been clucking throughout this speech, essayed to speak; but Psmith hurried on.</p>
			<p>“You are Agesilaus,” he said. “I am the Petulant Pterodactyl. You, if I may say so, butted in of your own free will, and took me from a happy home, simply in order that you might get me into this place under you, and give me beans. But, curiously enough, the major portion of that vegetable seems to be coming to you. Of course, you can administer the push if you like; but, as I say, it will be by way of a confession that your scheme has sprung a leak. Personally,” said Psmith, as one friend to another, “I should advise you to stick it out. You never know what may happen. At any moment I may fall from my present high standard of industry and excellence; and then you have me, so to speak, where the hair is crisp.”</p>
			<p>He paused. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke’s eyes, which even in their normal state protruded slightly, now looked as if they might fall out at any moment. His face had passed from the plum-coloured stage to something beyond. Every now and then he made the clucking noise, but except for that he was silent. Psmith, having waited for some time for something in the shape of comment or criticism on his remarks, now rose.</p>
			<p>“It has been a great treat to me, this little chat,” he said affably, “but I fear that I must no longer allow purely social enjoyments to interfere with my commercial pursuits. With your permission, I will rejoin my department, where my absence is doubtless already causing comment and possibly dismay. But we shall be meeting at the club shortly, I hope. Goodbye, sir, goodbye.”</p>
			<p>He left the room, and walked dreamily back to the Postage Department, leaving the manager still staring glassily at nothing.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
