<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VII: Going Into Winter Quarters</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Going Into Winter Quarters</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>There was.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rossiter had discovered Psmith’s and Mike’s absence about five minutes after they had left the building. Ever since then, he had been popping out of his lair at intervals of three minutes, to see whether they had returned. Constant disappointment in this respect had rendered him decidedly jumpy. When Psmith and Mike reached the desk, he was a kind of human soda-water bottle. He fizzed over with questions, reproofs, and warnings.</p>
			<p>“What does it mean? What does it mean?” he cried. “Where have you been? Where have you been?”</p>
			<p>“Poetry,” said Psmith approvingly.</p>
			<p>“You have been absent from your places for over half an hour. Why? Why? Why? Where have you been? Where have you been? I cannot have this. It is preposterous. Where have you been? Suppose <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke had happened to come round here. I should not have known what to say to him.”</p>
			<p>“Never an easy man to chat with, Comrade Bickersdyke,” agreed Psmith.</p>
			<p>“You must thoroughly understand that you are expected to remain in your places during business hours.”</p>
			<p>“Of course,” said Psmith, “that makes it a little hard for Comrade Jackson to post letters, does it not?”</p>
			<p>“Have you been posting letters?”</p>
			<p>“We have,” said Psmith. “You have wronged us. Seeing our absent places you jumped rashly to the conclusion that we were merely gadding about in pursuit of pleasure. Error. All the while we were furthering the bank’s best interests by posting letters.”</p>
			<p>“You had no business to leave your place. Jackson is on the posting desk.”</p>
			<p>“You are very right,” said Psmith, “and it shall not occur again. It was only because it was the first day, Comrade Jackson is not used to the stir and bustle of the City. His nerve failed him. He shrank from going to the post office alone. So I volunteered to accompany him. And,” concluded Psmith, impressively, “we won safely through. Every letter has been posted.”</p>
			<p>“That need not have taken you half an hour.”</p>
			<p>“True. And the actual work did not. It was carried through swiftly and surely. But the nerve strain had left us shaken. Before resuming our more ordinary duties we had to refresh. A brief breathing space, a little coffee and porridge, and here we are, fit for work once more.”</p>
			<p>“If it occurs again, I shall report the matter to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke.”</p>
			<p>“And rightly so,” said Psmith, earnestly. “Quite rightly so. Discipline, discipline. That is the cry. There must be no shirking of painful duties. Sentiment must play no part in business. Rossiter, the man, may sympathise, but Rossiter, the Departmental head, must be adamant.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rossiter pondered over this for a moment, then went off on a side-issue.</p>
			<p>“What is the meaning of this foolery?” he asked, pointing to Psmith’s gloves and hat. “Suppose <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke had come round and seen them, what should I have said?”</p>
			<p>“You would have given him a message of cheer. You would have said, ‘All is well. Psmith has not left us. He will come back. And Comrade Bickersdyke, relieved, would have⁠—’ ”</p>
			<p>“You do not seem very busy, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Smith.”</p>
			<p>Both Psmith and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rossiter were startled.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rossiter jumped as if somebody had run a gimlet into him, and even Psmith started slightly. They had not heard <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke approaching. Mike, who had been stolidly entering addresses in his ledger during the latter part of the conversation, was also taken by surprise.</p>
			<p>Psmith was the first to recover. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rossiter was still too confused for speech, but Psmith took the situation in hand.</p>
			<p>“Apparently no,” he said, swiftly removing his hat from the ruler. “In reality, yes. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rossiter and I were just scheming out a line of work for me as you came up. If you had arrived a moment later, you would have found me toiling.”</p>
			<p>“H’m. I hope I should. We do not encourage idling in this bank.”</p>
			<p>“Assuredly not,” said Psmith warmly. “Most assuredly not. I would not have it otherwise. I am a worker. A bee, not a drone. A <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Lusitania</i>, not a limpet. Perhaps I have not yet that grip on my duties which I shall soon acquire; but it is coming. It is coming. I see daylight.”</p>
			<p>“H’m. I have only your word for it.” He turned to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rossiter, who had now recovered himself, and was as nearly calm as it was in his nature to be. “Do you find <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Smith’s work satisfactory, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rossiter?”</p>
			<p>Psmith waited resignedly for an outburst of complaint respecting the small matter that had been under discussion between the head of the department and himself; but to his surprise it did not come.</p>
			<p>“Oh⁠—ah⁠—quite, quite, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke. I think he will very soon pick things up.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke turned away. He was a conscientious bank manager, and one can only suppose that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rossiter’s tribute to the earnestness of one of his employees was gratifying to him. But for that, one would have said that he was disappointed.</p>
			<p>“Oh, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke,” said Psmith.</p>
			<p>The manager stopped.</p>
			<p>“Father sent his kind regards to you,” said Psmith benevolently.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke walked off without comment.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>“An uncommonly cheery, companionable feller,” murmured Psmith, as he turned to his work.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>The first day anywhere, if one spends it in a sedentary fashion, always seemed unending; and Mike felt as if he had been sitting at his desk for weeks when the hour for departure came. A bank’s day ends gradually, reluctantly, as it were. At about five there is a sort of stir, not unlike the stir in a theatre when the curtain is on the point of falling. Ledgers are closed with a bang. Men stand about and talk for a moment or two before going to the basement for their hats and coats. Then, at irregular intervals, forms pass down the central aisle and out through the swing doors. There is an air of relaxation over the place, though some departments are still working as hard as ever under a blaze of electric light. Somebody begins to sing, and an instant chorus of protests and maledictions rises from all sides. Gradually, however, the electric lights go out. The procession down the centre aisle becomes more regular; and eventually the place is left to darkness and the night watchman.</p>
			<p>The postage department was one of the last to be freed from duty. This was due to the inconsiderateness of the other departments, which omitted to disgorge their letters till the last moment. Mike as he grew familiar with the work, and began to understand it, used to prowl round the other departments during the afternoon and wrest letters from them, usually receiving with them much abuse for being a nuisance and not leaving honest workers alone. Today, however, he had to sit on till nearly six, waiting for the final batch of correspondence.</p>
			<p>Psmith, who had waited patiently with him, though his own work was finished, accompanied him down to the post office and back again to the bank to return the letter basket; and they left the office together.</p>
			<p>“By the way,” said Psmith, “what with the strenuous labours of the bank and the disturbing interviews with the powers that be, I have omitted to ask you where you are digging. Wherever it is, of course you must clear out. It is imperative, in this crisis, that we should be together. I have acquired a quite snug little flat in Clement’s Inn. There is a spare bedroom. It shall be yours.”</p>
			<p>“My dear chap,” said Mike, “it’s all rot. I can’t sponge on you.”</p>
			<p>“You pain me, Comrade Jackson. I was not suggesting such a thing. We are businessmen, hardheaded young bankers. I make you a business proposition. I offer you the post of confidential secretary and adviser to me in exchange for a comfortable home. The duties will be light. You will be required to refuse invitations to dinner from crowned heads, and to listen attentively to my views on Life. Apart from this, there is little to do. So that’s settled.”</p>
			<p>“It isn’t,” said Mike. “I⁠—”</p>
			<p>“You will enter upon your duties tonight. Where are you suspended at present?”</p>
			<p>“Dulwich. But, look here⁠—”</p>
			<p>“A little more, and you’ll get the sack. I tell you the thing is settled. Now, let us hail yon taximeter cab, and desire the stern-faced aristocrat on the box to drive us to Dulwich. We will then collect a few of your things in a bag, have the rest off by train, come back in the taxi, and go and bite a chop at the Carlton. This is a momentous day in our careers, Comrade Jackson. We must buoy ourselves up.”</p>
			<p>Mike made no further objections. The thought of that bed-sitting room in Acacia Road and the pantomime dame rose up and killed them. After all, Psmith was not like any ordinary person. There would be no question of charity. Psmith had invited him to the flat in exactly the same spirit as he had invited him to his house for the cricket week.</p>
			<p>“You know,” said Psmith, after a silence, as they flitted through the streets in the taximeter, “one lives and learns. Were you so wrapped up in your work this afternoon that you did not hear my very entertaining little chat with Comrade Bickersdyke, or did it happen to come under your notice? It did? Then I wonder if you were struck by the singular conduct of Comrade Rossiter?”</p>
			<p>“I thought it rather decent of him not to give you away to that blighter Bickersdyke.”</p>
			<p>“Admirably put. It was precisely that that struck me. He had his opening, all ready made for him, but he refrained from depositing me in the soup. I tell you, Comrade Jackson, my rugged old heart was touched. I said to myself, ‘There must be good in Comrade Rossiter, after all. I must cultivate him.’ I shall make it my business to be kind to our Departmental head. He deserves the utmost consideration. His action shone like a good deed in a wicked world. Which it was, of course. From today onwards I take Comrade Rossiter under my wing. We seem to be getting into a tolerably benighted quarter. Are we anywhere near? ‘Through Darkest Dulwich in a Taximeter.’ ”</p>
			<p>The cab arrived at Dulwich station, and Mike stood up to direct the driver. They whirred down Acacia Road. Mike stopped the cab and got out. A brief and somewhat embarrassing interview with the pantomime dame, during which Mike was separated from a week’s rent in lieu of notice, and he was in the cab again, bound for Clement’s Inn.</p>
			<p>His feelings that night differed considerably from the frame of mind in which he had gone to bed the night before. It was partly a very excellent dinner and partly the fact that Psmith’s flat, though at present in some disorder, was obviously going to be extremely comfortable, that worked the change. But principally it was due to his having found an ally. The gnawing loneliness had gone. He did not look forward to a career of Commerce with any greater pleasure than before; but there was no doubt that with Psmith, it would be easier to get through the time after office hours. If all went well in the bank he might find that he had not drawn such a bad ticket after all.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
