<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 17: Sunday Supper</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-17" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVII</span>
				<span epub:type="subtitle">Sunday Supper</span>
			</h2>
			<p>The cab took them back to the flat, at considerable expense, and Psmith requested Mike to make tea, a performance in which he himself was interested purely as a spectator. He had views on the subject of tea-making which he liked to expound from an armchair or sofa, but he never got further than this. Mike, his back throbbing dully from the blow he had received, and feeling more than a little sore all over, prepared the Etna, fetched the milk, and finally produced the finished article.</p>
			<p>Psmith sipped meditatively.</p>
			<p>“How pleasant,” he said, “after strife is rest. We shouldn’t have appreciated this simple cup of tea had our sensibilities remained unstirred this afternoon. We can now sit at our ease, like warriors after the fray, till the time comes for setting out to Comrade Waller’s once more.”</p>
			<p>Mike looked up.</p>
			<p>“What! You don’t mean to say you’re going to sweat out to Clapham again?”</p>
			<p>“Undoubtedly. Comrade Waller is expecting us to supper.”</p>
			<p>“What absolute rot! We can’t fag back there.”</p>
			<p>“Noblesse oblige. The cry has gone round the Waller household, ‘Jackson and Psmith are coming to supper,’ and we cannot disappoint them now. Already the fatted blancmange has been killed, and the table creaks beneath what’s left of the midday beef. We must be there; besides, don’t you want to see how the poor man is? Probably we shall find him in the act of emitting his last breath. I expect he was lynched by the enthusiastic mob.”</p>
			<p>“Not much,” grinned Mike. “They were too busy with us. All right, I’ll come if you really want me to, but it’s awful rot.”</p>
			<p>One of the many things Mike could never understand in Psmith was his fondness for getting into atmospheres that were not his own. He would go out of his way to do this. Mike, like most boys of his age, was never really happy and at his ease except in the presence of those of his own years and class. Psmith, on the contrary, seemed to be bored by them, and infinitely preferred talking to somebody who lived in quite another world. Mike was not a snob. He simply had not the ability to be at his ease with people in another class from his own. He did not know what to talk to them about, unless they were cricket professionals. With them he was never at a loss.</p>
			<p>But Psmith was different. He could get on with anyone. He seemed to have the gift of entering into their minds and seeing things from their point of view.</p>
			<p>As regarded <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waller, Mike liked him personally, and was prepared, as we have seen, to undertake considerable risks in his defence; but he loathed with all his heart and soul the idea of supper at his house. He knew that he would have nothing to say. Whereas Psmith gave him the impression of looking forward to the thing as a treat.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>The house where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waller lived was one of a row of semidetached villas on the north side of the Common. The door was opened to them by their host himself. So far from looking battered and emitting last breaths, he appeared particularly spruce. He had just returned from Church, and was still wearing his gloves and tall hat. He squeaked with surprise when he saw who were standing on the mat.</p>
			<p>“Why, dear me, dear me,” he said. “Here you are! I have been wondering what had happened to you. I was afraid that you might have been seriously hurt. I was afraid those ruffians might have injured you. When last I saw you, you were being⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Chivvied,” interposed Psmith, with dignified melancholy. “Do not let us try to wrap the fact up in pleasant words. We were being chivvied. We were legging it with the infuriated mob at our heels. An ignominious position for a Shropshire Psmith, but, after all, Napoleon did the same.”</p>
			<p>“But what happened? I could not see. I only know that quite suddenly the people seemed to stop listening to me, and all gathered round you and Jackson. And then I saw that Jackson was engaged in a fight with a young man.”</p>
			<p>“Comrade Jackson, I imagine, having heard a great deal about all men being equal, was anxious to test the theory, and see whether Comrade Bill was as good a man as he was. The experiment was broken off prematurely, but I personally should be inclined to say that Comrade Jackson had a shade the better of the exchanges.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waller looked with interest at Mike, who shuffled and felt awkward. He was hoping that Psmith would say nothing about the reason of his engaging Bill in combat. He had an uneasy feeling that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waller’s gratitude would be effusive and overpowering, and he did not wish to pose as the brave young hero. There are moments when one does not feel equal to the role.</p>
			<p>Fortunately, before <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waller had time to ask any further questions, the supper-bell sounded, and they went into the dining-room.</p>
			<p>Sunday supper, unless done on a large and informal scale, is probably the most depressing meal in existence. There is a chill discomfort in the round of beef, an icy severity about the open jam tart. The blancmange shivers miserably.</p>
			<p>Spirituous liquor helps to counteract the influence of these things, and so does exhilarating conversation. Unfortunately, at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waller’s table there was neither. The cashier’s views on temperance were not merely for the platform; they extended to the home. And the company was not of the exhilarating sort. Besides Psmith and Mike and their host, there were four people present⁠—Comrade Prebble, the orator; a young man of the name of Richards; <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waller’s niece, answering to the name of Ada, who was engaged to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Richards; and Edward.</p>
			<p>Edward was <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waller’s son. He was ten years old, wore a very tight Eton suit, and had the peculiarly loathsome expression which a snub nose sometimes gives to the young.</p>
			<p>It would have been plain to the most casual observer that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waller was fond and proud of his son. The cashier was a widower, and after five minutes’ acquaintance with Edward, Mike felt strongly that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Waller was the lucky one. Edward sat next to Mike, and showed a tendency to concentrate his conversation on him. Psmith, at the opposite end of the table, beamed in a fatherly manner upon the pair through his eyeglass.</p>
			<p>Mike got on with small girls reasonably well. He preferred them at a distance, but, if cornered by them, could put up a fairly good show. Small boys, however, filled him with a sort of frozen horror. It was his view that a boy should not be exhibited publicly until he reached an age when he might be in the running for some sort of colours at a public school.</p>
			<p>Edward was one of those well-informed small boys. He opened on Mike with the first mouthful.</p>
			<p>“Do you know the principal exports of Marseilles?” he inquired.</p>
			<p>“What?” said Mike coldly.</p>
			<p>“Do you know the principal exports of Marseilles? I do.”</p>
			<p>“Oh?” said Mike.</p>
			<p>“Yes. Do you know the capital of Madagascar?”</p>
			<p>Mike, as crimson as the beef he was attacking, said he did not.</p>
			<p>“I do.”</p>
			<p>“Oh?” said Mike.</p>
			<p>“Who was the first king⁠—”</p>
			<p>“You mustn’t worry <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Jackson, Teddy,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waller, with a touch of pride in his voice, as who should say “There are not many boys of his age, I can tell you, who <em>could</em> worry you with questions like that.”</p>
			<p>“No, no, he likes it,” said Psmith, unnecessarily. “He likes it. I always hold that much may be learned by casual chitchat across the dinner table. I owe much of my own grasp of⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I bet <em>you</em> don’t know what’s the capital of Madagascar,” interrupted Mike rudely.</p>
			<p>“I do,” said Edward. “I can tell you the kings of Israel?” he added, turning to Mike. He seemed to have no curiosity as to the extent of Psmith’s knowledge. Mike’s appeared to fascinate him.</p>
			<p>Mike helped himself to beetroot in moody silence.</p>
			<p>His mouth was full when Comrade Prebble asked him a question. Comrade Prebble, as has been pointed out in an earlier part of the narrative, was a good chap, but had no roof to his mouth.</p>
			<p>“I beg your pardon?” said Mike.</p>
			<p>Comrade Prebble repeated his observation. Mike looked helplessly at Psmith, but Psmith’s eyes were on his plate.</p>
			<p>Mike felt he must venture on some answer.</p>
			<p>“No,” he said decidedly.</p>
			<p>Comrade Prebble seemed slightly taken aback. There was an awkward pause. Then <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waller, for whom his fellow Socialist’s methods of conversation held no mysteries, interpreted.</p>
			<p>“The mustard, Prebble? Yes, yes. Would you mind passing Prebble the mustard, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Jackson?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, sorry,” gasped Mike, and, reaching out, upset the water-jug into the open jam-tart.</p>
			<p>Through the black mist which rose before his eyes as he leaped to his feet and stammered apologies came the dispassionate voice of Master Edward Waller reminding him that mustard was first introduced into Peru by Cortez.</p>
			<p>His host was all courtesy and consideration. He passed the matter off genially. But life can never be quite the same after you have upset a water-jug into an open jam-tart at the table of a comparative stranger. Mike’s nerve had gone. He ate on, but he was a broken man.</p>
			<p>At the other end of the table it became gradually apparent that things were not going on altogether as they should have done. There was a sort of bleakness in the atmosphere. Young <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Richards was looking like a stuffed fish, and the face of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waller’s niece was cold and set.</p>
			<p>“Why, come, come, Ada,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waller, breezily, “what’s the matter? You’re eating nothing. What’s George been saying to you?” he added jocularly.</p>
			<p>“Thank you, uncle Robert,” replied Ada precisely, “there’s nothing the matter. Nothing that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Richards can say to me can upset me.”</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Richards!” echoed <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waller in astonishment. How was he to know that, during the walk back from church, the world had been transformed, George had become <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Richards, and all was over?</p>
			<p>“I assure you, Ada⁠—” began that unfortunate young man. Ada turned a frigid shoulder towards him.</p>
			<p>“Come, come,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waller disturbed. “What’s all this? What’s all this?”</p>
			<p>His niece burst into tears and left the room.</p>
			<p>If there is anything more embarrassing to a guest than a family row, we have yet to hear of it. Mike, scarlet to the extreme edges of his ears, concentrated himself on his plate. Comrade Prebble made a great many remarks, which were probably illuminating, if they could have been understood. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waller looked, astonished, at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Richards. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Richards, pink but dogged, loosened his collar, but said nothing. Psmith, leaning forward, asked Master Edward Waller his opinion on the Licensing Bill.</p>
			<p>“We happened to have a word or two,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Richards at length, “on the way home from church on the subject of Women’s Suffrage.”</p>
			<p>“That fatal topic!” murmured Psmith.</p>
			<p>“In Australia⁠—” began Master Edward Waller.</p>
			<p>“I was rayther⁠—well, rayther facetious about it,” continued <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Richards.</p>
			<p>Psmith clicked his tongue sympathetically.</p>
			<p>“In Australia⁠—” said Edward.</p>
			<p>“I went talking on, laughing and joking, when all of a sudden she flew out at me. How was I to know she was ’eart and soul in the movement? You never told me,” he added accusingly to his host.</p>
			<p>“In Australia⁠—” said Edward.</p>
			<p>“I’ll go and try and get her round. How was I to know?”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Richards thrust back his chair and bounded from the room.</p>
			<p>“Now, iawinyaw, iear oiler⁠—” said Comrade Prebble judicially, but was interrupted.</p>
			<p>“How very disturbing!” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waller. “I am so sorry that this should have happened. Ada is such a touchy, sensitive girl. She⁠—”</p>
			<p>“In Australia,” said Edward in even tones, “they’ve <em>got</em> Women’s Suffrage already. Did <em>you</em> know that?” he said to Mike.</p>
			<p>Mike made no answer. His eyes were fixed on his plate. A bead of perspiration began to roll down his forehead. If his feelings could have been ascertained at that moment, they would have been summed up in the words, “Death, where is thy sting?”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
