<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VIII: The Friendly Native</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Friendly Native</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>“The first principle of warfare,” said Psmith at breakfast next morning, doling out bacon and eggs with the air of a medieval monarch distributing largesse, “is to collect a gang, to rope in allies, to secure the cooperation of some friendly native. You may remember that at Sedleigh it was partly the sympathetic cooperation of that record blitherer, Comrade Jellicoe, which enabled us to nip the pro-Spiller movement in the bud. It is the same in the present crisis. What Comrade Jellicoe was to us at Sedleigh, Comrade Rossiter must be in the City. We must make an ally of that man. Once I know that he and I are as brothers, and that he will look with a lenient and benevolent eye on any little shortcomings in my work, I shall be able to devote my attention wholeheartedly to the moral reformation of Comrade Bickersdyke, that man of blood. I look on Comrade Bickersdyke as a bargee of the most pronounced type; and anything I can do towards making him a decent member of Society shall be done freely and ungrudgingly. A trifle more tea, Comrade Jackson?”</p>
			<p>“No, thanks,” said Mike. “I’ve done. By Jove, Smith, this flat of yours is all right.”</p>
			<p>“Not bad,” assented Psmith, “not bad. Free from squalor to a great extent. I have a number of little objects of vertu coming down shortly from the old homestead. Pictures, and so on. It will be by no means un-snug when they are up. Meanwhile, I can rough it. We are old campaigners, we Psmiths. Give us a roof, a few comfortable chairs, a sofa or two, half a dozen cushions, and decent meals, and we do not repine. Reverting once more to Comrade Rossiter⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Yes, what about him?” said Mike. “You’ll have a pretty tough job turning him into a friendly native, I should think. How do you mean to start?”</p>
			<p>Psmith regarded him with a benevolent eye.</p>
			<p>“There is but one way,” he said. “Do you remember the case of Comrade Outwood, at Sedleigh? How did we corral him, and become to him practically as long-lost sons?”</p>
			<p>“We got round him by joining the Archaeological Society.”</p>
			<p>“Precisely,” said Psmith. “Every man has his hobby. The thing is to find it out. In the case of comrade Rossiter, I should say that it would be either postage stamps, dried seaweed, or Hall Caine. I shall endeavour to find out today. A few casual questions, and the thing is done. Shall we be putting in an appearance at the busy hive now? If we are to continue in the running for the bonus stakes, it would be well to start soon.”</p>
			<p>Mike’s first duty at the bank that morning was to check the stamps and petty cash. While he was engaged on this task, he heard Psmith conversing affably with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rossiter.</p>
			<p>“Good morning,” said Psmith.</p>
			<p>“Morning,” replied his chief, doing sleight-of-hand tricks with a bundle of letters which lay on his desk. “Get on with your work, Psmith. We have a lot before us.”</p>
			<p>“Undoubtedly. I am all impatience. I should say that in an institution like this, dealing as it does with distant portions of the globe, a philatelist would have excellent opportunities of increasing his collection. With me, stamp collecting has always been a positive craze. I⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I have no time for nonsense of that sort myself,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rossiter. “I should advise you, if you mean to get on, to devote more time to your work and less to stamps.”</p>
			<p>“I will start at once. Dried seaweed, again⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Get on with your work, Smith.”</p>
			<p>Psmith retired to his desk.</p>
			<p>“This,” he said to Mike, “is undoubtedly something in the nature of a setback. I have drawn blank. The papers bring out posters, ‘Psmith Baffled.’ I must try again. Meanwhile, to work. Work, the hobby of the philosopher and the poor man’s friend.”</p>
			<p>The morning dragged slowly on without incident. At twelve o’clock Mike had to go out and buy stamps, which he subsequently punched in the punching-machine in the basement, a not very exhilarating job in which he was assisted by one of the bank messengers, who discoursed learnedly on roses during the séance. Roses were his hobby. Mike began to see that Psmith had reason in his assumption that the way to every man’s heart was through his hobby. Mike made a firm friend of William, the messenger, by displaying an interest and a certain knowledge of roses. At the same time the conversation had the bad effect of leading to an acute relapse in the matter of homesickness. The rose garden at home had been one of Mike’s favourite haunts on a summer afternoon. The contrast between it and the basement of the new Asiatic Bank, the atmosphere of which was far from being roselike, was too much for his feelings. He emerged from the depths, with his punched stamps, filled with bitterness against Fate.</p>
			<p>He found Psmith still baffled.</p>
			<p>“Hall Caine,” said Psmith regretfully, “has also proved a frost. I wandered round to Comrade Rossiter’s desk just now with a rather brainy excursus on <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Eternal City</i>, and was received with the Impatient Frown rather than the Glad Eye. He was in the middle of adding up a rather tricky column of figures, and my remarks caused him to drop a stitch. So far from winning the man over, I have gone back. There now exists between Comrade Rossiter and myself a certain coldness. Further investigations will be postponed till after lunch.”</p>
			<p>The postage department received visitors during the morning. Members of other departments came with letters, among them Bannister. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rossiter was away in the manager’s room at the time.</p>
			<p>“How are you getting on?” said Bannister to Mike.</p>
			<p>“Oh, all right,” said Mike.</p>
			<p>“Had any trouble with Rossiter yet?”</p>
			<p>“No, not much.”</p>
			<p>“He hasn’t run you in to Bickersdyke?”</p>
			<p>“No.”</p>
			<p>“Pardon my interrupting a conversation between old college chums,” said Psmith courteously, “but I happened to overhear, as I toiled at my desk, the name of Comrade Rossiter.”</p>
			<p>Bannister looked somewhat startled. Mike introduced them.</p>
			<p>“This is Smith,” he said. “Chap I was at school with. This is Bannister, Smith, who used to be on here till I came.”</p>
			<p>“In this department?” asked Psmith.</p>
			<p>“Yes.”</p>
			<p>“Then, Comrade Bannister, you are the very man I have been looking for. Your knowledge will be invaluable to us. I have no doubt that, during your stay in this excellently managed department, you had many opportunities of observing Comrade Rossiter?”</p>
			<p>“I should jolly well think I had,” said Bannister with a laugh. “He saw to that. He was always popping out and cursing me about something.”</p>
			<p>“Comrade Rossiter’s manners are a little restive,” agreed Psmith. “What used you to talk to him about?”</p>
			<p>“What used I to talk to him about?”</p>
			<p>“Exactly. In those interviews to which you have alluded, how did you amuse, entertain Comrade Rossiter?”</p>
			<p>“I didn’t. He used to do all the talking there was.”</p>
			<p>Psmith straightened his tie, and clicked his tongue, disappointed.</p>
			<p>“This is unfortunate,” he said, smoothing his hair. “You see, Comrade Bannister, it is this way. In the course of my professional duties, I find myself continually coming into contact with Comrade Rossiter.”</p>
			<p>“I bet you do,” said Bannister.</p>
			<p>“On these occasions I am frequently at a loss for entertaining conversation. He has no difficulty, as apparently happened in your case, in keeping up his end of the dialogue. The subject of my shortcomings provides him with ample material for speech. I, on the other hand, am dumb. I have nothing to say.”</p>
			<p>“I should think that was a bit of a change for you, wasn’t it?”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps, so,” said Psmith, “perhaps so. On the other hand, however restful it may be to myself, it does not enable me to secure Comrade Rossiter’s interest and win his esteem.”</p>
			<p>“What Smith wants to know,” said Mike, “is whether Rossiter has any hobby of any kind. He thinks, if he has, he might work it to keep in with him.”</p>
			<p>Psmith, who had been listening with an air of pleased interest, much as a father would listen to his child prattling for the benefit of a visitor, confirmed this statement.</p>
			<p>“Comrade Jackson,” he said, “has put the matter with his usual admirable clearness. That is the thing in a nutshell. Has Comrade Rossiter any hobby that you know of? Spillikins, brass-rubbing, the Near Eastern Question, or anything like that? I have tried him with postage stamps (which you’d think, as head of a postage department, he ought to be interested in), and dried seaweed, Hall Caine, but I have the honour to report total failure. The man seems to have no pleasures. What does he do with himself when the day’s toil is ended? That giant brain must occupy itself somehow.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know,” said Bannister, “unless it’s football. I saw him once watching Chelsea. I was rather surprised.”</p>
			<p>“Football,” said Psmith thoughtfully, “football. By no means a scaly idea. I rather fancy, Comrade Bannister, that you have whanged the nail on the head. Is he strong on any particular team? I mean, have you ever heard him, in the intervals of business worries, stamping on his desk and yelling, ‘Buck up Cottagers!’ or ‘Lay ’em out, Pensioners!’ or anything like that? One moment.” Psmith held up his hand. “I will get my Sherlock Holmes system to work. What was the other team in the modern gladiatorial contest at which you saw Comrade Rossiter?”</p>
			<p>“Manchester United.”</p>
			<p>“And Comrade Rossiter, I should say, was a Manchester man.”</p>
			<p>“I believe he is.”</p>
			<p>“Then I am prepared to bet a small sum that he is nuts on Manchester United. My dear Holmes, how⁠—! Elementary, my dear fellow, quite elementary. But here comes the lad in person.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rossiter turned in from the central aisle through the counter-door, and, observing the conversational group at the postage-desk, came bounding up. Bannister moved off.</p>
			<p>“Really, Smith,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rossiter, “you always seem to be talking. I have overlooked the matter once, as I did not wish to get you into trouble so soon after joining; but, really, it cannot go on. I must take notice of it.”</p>
			<p>Psmith held up his hand.</p>
			<p>“The fault was mine,” he said, with manly frankness. “Entirely mine. Bannister came in a purely professional spirit to deposit a letter with Comrade Jackson. I engaged him in conversation on the subject of the Football League, and I was just trying to correct his view that Newcastle United were the best team playing, when you arrived.”</p>
			<p>“It is perfectly absurd,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rossiter, “that you should waste the bank’s time in this way. The bank pays you to work, not to talk about professional football.”</p>
			<p>“Just so, just so,” murmured Psmith.</p>
			<p>“There is too much talking in this department.”</p>
			<p>“I fear you are right.”</p>
			<p>“It is nonsense.”</p>
			<p>“My own view,” said Psmith, “was that Manchester United were by far the finest team before the public.”</p>
			<p>“Get on with your work, Smith.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rossiter stumped off to his desk, where he sat as one in thought.</p>
			<p>“Smith,” he said at the end of five minutes.</p>
			<p>Psmith slid from his stool, and made his way deferentially towards him.</p>
			<p>“Bannister’s a fool,” snapped <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rossiter.</p>
			<p>“So I thought,” said Psmith.</p>
			<p>“A perfect fool. He always was.”</p>
			<p>Psmith shook his head sorrowfully, as who should say, “Exit Bannister.”</p>
			<p>“There is no team playing today to touch Manchester United.”</p>
			<p>“Precisely what I said to Comrade Bannister.”</p>
			<p>“Of course. You know something about it.”</p>
			<p>“The study of League football,” said Psmith, “has been my relaxation for years.”</p>
			<p>“But we have no time to discuss it now.”</p>
			<p>“Assuredly not, sir. Work before everything.”</p>
			<p>“Some other time, when⁠—”</p>
			<p>“⁠—We are less busy. Precisely.”</p>
			<p>Psmith moved back to his seat.</p>
			<p>“I fear,” he said to Mike, as he resumed work, “that as far as Comrade Rossiter’s friendship and esteem are concerned, I have to a certain extent landed Comrade Bannister in the bouillon; but it was in a good cause. I fancy we have won through. Half an hour’s thoughtful perusal of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Footballers’ Who’s Who</i>, just to find out some elementary facts about Manchester United, and I rather think the friendly Native is corralled. And now once more to work. Work, the hobby of the hustler and the deadbeat’s dread.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
