<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXVII: At Lord’s</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-27" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">At Lord’s</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Mike got to Lord’s just as the umpires moved out into the field. He raced round to the pavilion. Joe met him on the stairs.</p>
			<p>“It’s all right,” he said. “No hurry. We’ve won the toss. I’ve put you in fourth wicket.”</p>
			<p>“Right ho,” said Mike. “Glad we haven’t to field just yet.”</p>
			<p>“We oughtn’t to have to field today if we don’t chuck our wickets away.”</p>
			<p>“Good wicket?”</p>
			<p>“Like a billiard table. I’m glad you were able to come. Have any difficulty in getting away?”</p>
			<p>Joe Jackson’s knowledge of the workings of a bank was of the slightest. He himself had never, since he left Oxford, been in a position where there were obstacles to getting off to play in first-class cricket. By profession he was agent to a sporting baronet whose hobby was the cricket of the county, and so, far from finding any difficulty in playing for the county, he was given to understand by his employer that that was his chief duty. It never occurred to him that Mike might find his bank less amenable in the matter of giving leave. His only fear, when he rang Mike up that morning, had been that this might be a particularly busy day at the New Asiatic Bank. If there was no special rush of work, he took it for granted that Mike would simply go to the manager, ask for leave to play in the match, and be given it with a beaming smile.</p>
			<p>Mike did not answer the question, but asked one on his own account.</p>
			<p>“How did you happen to be short?” he said.</p>
			<p>“It was rotten luck. It was like this. We were altering our team after the Sussex match, to bring in Ballard, Keene, and Willis. They couldn’t get down to Brighton, as the ’Varsity had a match, but there was nothing on for them in the last half of the week, so they’d promised to roll up.”</p>
			<p>Ballard, Keene, and Willis were members of the Cambridge team, all very capable performers and much in demand by the county, when they could get away to play for it.</p>
			<p>“Well?” said Mike.</p>
			<p>“Well, we all came up by train from Brighton last night. But these three asses had arranged to motor down from Cambridge early today, and get here in time for the start. What happens? Why, Willis, who fancies himself as a chauffeur, undertakes to do the driving; and naturally, being an absolute rotter, goes and smashes up the whole concern just outside <abbr>St.</abbr> Albans. The first thing I knew of it was when I got to Lord’s at half past ten, and found a wire waiting for me to say that they were all three of them crocked, and couldn’t possibly play. I tell you, it was a bit of a jar to get half an hour before the match started. Willis has sprained his ankle, apparently; Keene’s damaged his wrist; and Ballard has smashed his collarbone. I don’t suppose they’ll be able to play in the ’Varsity match. Rotten luck for Cambridge. Well, fortunately we’d had two reserve pros, with us at Brighton, who had come up to London with the team in case they might be wanted, so, with them, we were only one short. Then I thought of you. That’s how it was.”</p>
			<p>“I see,” said Mike. “Who are the pros?”</p>
			<p>“Davis and Brockley. Both bowlers. It weakens our batting a lot. Ballard or Willis might have got a stack of runs on this wicket. Still, we’ve got a certain amount of batting as it is. We oughtn’t to do badly, if we’re careful. You’ve been getting some practice, I suppose, this season?”</p>
			<p>“In a sort of a way. Nets and so on. No matches of any importance.”</p>
			<p>“Dash it, I wish you’d had a game or two in decent class cricket. Still, nets are better than nothing, I hope you’ll be in form. We may want a pretty long knock from you, if things go wrong. These men seem to be settling down all right, thank goodness,” he added, looking out of the window at the county’s first pair, Warrington and Mills, two professionals, who, as the result of ten minutes’ play, had put up twenty.</p>
			<p>“I’d better go and change,” said Mike, picking up his bag. “You’re in first wicket, I suppose?”</p>
			<p>“Yes. And Reggie, second wicket.”</p>
			<p>Reggie was another of Mike’s brothers, not nearly so fine a player as Joe, but a sound bat, who generally made runs if allowed to stay in.</p>
			<p>Mike changed, and went out into the little balcony at the top of the pavilion. He had it to himself. There were not many spectators in the pavilion at this early stage of the game.</p>
			<p>There are few more restful places, if one wishes to think, than the upper balconies of Lord’s pavilion. Mike, watching the game making its leisurely progress on the turf below, set himself seriously to review the situation in all its aspects. The exhilaration of bursting the bonds had begun to fade, and he found himself able to look into the matter of his desertion and weigh up the consequences. There was no doubt that he had cut the painter once and for all. Even a friendly-disposed management could hardly overlook what he had done. And the management of the New Asiatic Bank was the very reverse of friendly. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke, he knew, would jump at this chance of getting rid of him. He realized that he must look on his career in the bank as a closed book. It was definitely over, and he must now think about the future.</p>
			<p>It was not a time for half-measures. He could not go home. He must carry the thing through, now that he had begun, and find something definite to do, to support himself.</p>
			<p>There seemed only one opening for him. What could he do, he asked himself. Just one thing. He could play cricket. It was by his cricket that he must live. He would have to become a professional. Could he get taken on? That was the question. It was impossible that he should play for his own county on his residential qualification. He could not appear as a professional in the same team in which his brothers were playing as amateurs. He must stake all on his birth qualification for Surrey.</p>
			<p>On the other hand, had he the credentials which Surrey would want? He had a school reputation. But was that enough? He could not help feeling that it might not be.</p>
			<p>Thinking it over more tensely than he had ever thought over anything in his whole life, he saw clearly that everything depended on what sort of show he made in this match which was now in progress. It was his big chance. If he succeeded, all would be well. He did not care to think what his position would be if he did not succeed.</p>
			<p>A distant appeal and a sound of clapping from the crowd broke in on his thoughts. Mills was out, caught at the wicket. The telegraph board gave the total as forty-eight. Not sensational. The success of the team depended largely on what sort of a start the two professionals made.</p>
			<p>The clapping broke out again as Joe made his way down the steps. Joe, as an All England player, was a favourite with the crowd.</p>
			<p>Mike watched him play an over in his strong, graceful style: then it suddenly occurred to him that he would like to know how matters had gone at the bank in his absence.</p>
			<p>He went down to the telephone, rang up the bank, and asked for Psmith.</p>
			<p>Presently the familiar voice made itself heard.</p>
			<p>“Hullo, Smith.”</p>
			<p>“Hullo. Is that Comrade Jackson? How are things progressing?”</p>
			<p>“Fairly well. We’re in first. We’ve lost one wicket, and the fifty’s just up. I say, what’s happened at the bank?”</p>
			<p>“I broke the news to Comrade Gregory. A charming personality. I feel that we shall be friends.”</p>
			<p>“Was he sick?”</p>
			<p>“In a measure, yes. Indeed, I may say he practically foamed at the mouth. I explained the situation, but he was not to be appeased. He jerked me into the presence of Comrade Bickersdyke, with whom I had a brief but entertaining chat. He had not a great deal to say, but he listened attentively to my narrative, and eventually told me off to take your place in the Fixed Deposits. That melancholy task I am now performing to the best of my ability. I find the work a little trying. There is too much ledger-lugging to be done for my simple tastes. I have been hauling ledgers from the safe all the morning. The cry is beginning to go round, ‘Psmith is willing, but can his physique stand the strain?’ In the excitement of the moment just now I dropped a somewhat massive tome on to Comrade Gregory’s foot, unfortunately, I understand, the foot in which he has of late been suffering twinges of gout. I passed the thing off with ready tact, but I cannot deny that there was a certain temporary coolness, which, indeed, is not yet past. These things, Comrade Jackson, are the whirlpools in the quiet stream of commercial life.”</p>
			<p>“Have I got the sack?”</p>
			<p>“No official pronouncement has been made to me as yet on the subject, but I think I should advise you, if you are offered another job in the course of the day, to accept it. I cannot say that you are precisely the pet of the management just at present. However, I have ideas for your future, which I will divulge when we meet. I propose to slide coyly from the office at about four o’clock. I am meeting my father at that hour. We shall come straight on to Lord’s.”</p>
			<p>“Right ho,” said Mike. “I’ll be looking out for you.”</p>
			<p>“Is there any little message I can give Comrade Gregory from you?”</p>
			<p>“You can give him my love, if you like.”</p>
			<p>“It shall be done. Goodbye.”</p>
			<p>“Goodbye.”</p>
			<p>Mike replaced the receiver, and went up to his balcony again.</p>
			<p>As soon as his eye fell on the telegraph board he saw with a start that things had been moving rapidly in his brief absence. The numbers of the batsmen on the board were three and five.</p>
			<p>“Great Scott!” he cried. “Why, I’m in next. What on earth’s been happening?”</p>
			<p>He put on his pads hurriedly, expecting every moment that a wicket would fall and find him unprepared. But the batsmen were still together when he rose, ready for the fray, and went downstairs to get news.</p>
			<p>He found his brother Reggie in the dressing room.</p>
			<p>“What’s happened?” he said. “How were you out?”</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">L.B.W.</abbr>,” said Reggie. “Goodness knows how it happened. My eyesight must be going. I mistimed the thing altogether.”</p>
			<p>“How was Warrington out?”</p>
			<p>“Caught in the slips.”</p>
			<p>“By Jove!” said Mike. “This is pretty rocky. Three for sixty-one. We shall get mopped.”</p>
			<p>“Unless you and Joe do something. There’s no earthly need to get out. The wicket’s as good as you want, and the bowling’s nothing special. Well played, Joe!”</p>
			<p>A beautiful glide to leg by the greatest of the Jacksons had rolled up against the pavilion rails. The fieldsmen changed across for the next over.</p>
			<p>“If only Peters stops a bit⁠—” began Mike, and broke off. Peters’ off stump was lying at an angle of forty-five degrees.</p>
			<p>“Well, he hasn’t,” said Reggie grimly. “Silly ass, why did he hit at that one? All he’d got to do was to stay in with Joe. Now it’s up to you. Do try and do something, or we’ll be out under the hundred.”</p>
			<p>Mike waited till the outcoming batsman had turned in at the professionals’ gate. Then he walked down the steps and out into the open, feeling more nervous than he had felt since that far-off day when he had first gone in to bat for Wrykyn against the <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism" class="eoc">M.C.C.</abbr> He found his thoughts flying back to that occasion. Today, as then, everything seemed very distant and unreal. The spectators were miles away. He had often been to Lord’s as a spectator, but the place seemed entirely unfamiliar now. He felt as if he were in a strange land.</p>
			<p>He was conscious of Joe leaving the crease to meet him on his way. He smiled feebly. “Buck up,” said Joe in that robust way of his which was so heartening. “Nothing in the bowling, and the wicket like a shirtfront. Play just as if you were at the nets. And for goodness’ sake don’t try to score all your runs in the first over. Stick in, and we’ve got them.”</p>
			<p>Mike smiled again more feebly than before, and made a weird gurgling noise in his throat.</p>
			<p>It had been the Middlesex fast bowler who had destroyed Peters. Mike was not sorry. He did not object to fast bowling. He took guard, and looked round him, taking careful note of the positions of the slips.</p>
			<p>As usual, once he was at the wicket the paralysed feeling left him. He became conscious again of his power. Dash it all, what was there to be afraid of? He was a jolly good bat, and he would jolly well show them that he was, too.</p>
			<p>The fast bowler, with a preliminary bound, began his run. Mike settled himself into position, his whole soul concentrated on the ball. Everything else was wiped from his mind.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
