<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XX: Concerning a Cheque</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-20" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Concerning a Cheque</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Things never happen quite as one expects them to. Mike came to the office next morning prepared for a repetition of the previous day. He was amazed to find the cashier not merely cheerful, but even exuberantly cheerful. Edward, it appeared, had rallied in the afternoon, and, when his father had got home, had been out of danger. He was now going along excellently, and had stumped Ada, who was nursing him, with a question about the Thirty Years’ War, only a few minutes before his father had left to catch his train. The cashier was overflowing with happiness and goodwill towards his species. He greeted customers with bright remarks on the weather, and snappy views on the leading events of the day: the former tinged with optimism, the latter full of a gentle spirit of toleration. His attitude towards the latest actions of His Majesty’s Government was that of one who felt that, after all, there was probably some good even in the vilest of his fellow creatures, if one could only find it.</p>
			<p>Altogether, the cloud had lifted from the Cash Department. All was joy, jollity, and song.</p>
			<p>“The attitude of Comrade Waller,” said Psmith, on being informed of the change, “is reassuring. I may now think of my own troubles. Comrade Bristow has blown into the office today in patent leather boots with white kid uppers, as I believe the technical term is. Add to that the fact that he is still wearing the satin tie, the waistcoat, and the ring, and you will understand why I have definitely decided this morning to abandon all hope of his reform. Henceforth my services, for what they are worth, are at the disposal of Comrade Bickersdyke. My time from now onward is his. He shall have the full educative value of my exclusive attention. I give Comrade Bristow up. Made straight for the corner flag, you understand,” he added, as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Rossiter emerged from his lair, “and centred, and Sandy Turnbull headed a beautiful goal. I was just telling Jackson about the match against Blackburn Rovers,” he said to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Rossiter.</p>
			<p>“Just so, just so. But get on with your work, Smith. We are a little behindhand. I think perhaps it would be as well not to leave it just yet.”</p>
			<p>“I will leap at it at once,” said Psmith cordially.</p>
			<p>Mike went back to his department.</p>
			<p>The day passed quickly. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Waller, in the intervals of work, talked a good deal, mostly of Edward, his doings, his sayings, and his prospects. The only thing that seemed to worry <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Waller was the problem of how to employ his son’s almost superhuman talents to the best advantage. Most of the goals towards which the average man strives struck him as too unambitious for the prodigy.</p>
			<p>By the end of the day Mike had had enough of Edward. He never wished to hear the name again.</p>
			<p>We do not claim originality for the statement that things never happen quite as one expects them to. We repeat it now because of its profound truth. The Edward’s pneumonia episode having ended satisfactorily (or, rather, being apparently certain to end satisfactorily, for the invalid, though out of danger, was still in bed), Mike looked forward to a series of days unbroken by any but the minor troubles of life. For these he was prepared. What he did not expect was any big calamity.</p>
			<p>At the beginning of the day there were no signs of it. The sky was blue and free from all suggestions of approaching thunderbolts. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Waller, still chirpy, had nothing but good news of Edward. Mike went for his morning stroll round the office feeling that things had settled down and had made up their mind to run smoothly.</p>
			<p>When he got back, barely half an hour later, the storm had burst.</p>
			<p>There was no one in the department at the moment of his arrival; but a few minutes later he saw <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Waller come out of the manager’s room, and make his way down the aisle.</p>
			<p>It was his walk which first gave any hint that something was wrong. It was the same limp, crushed walk which Mike had seen when Edward’s safety still hung in the balance.</p>
			<p>As <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Waller came nearer, Mike saw that the cashier’s face was deadly pale.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Waller caught sight of him and quickened his pace.</p>
			<p>“Jackson,” he said.</p>
			<p>Mike came forward.</p>
			<p>“Do you⁠—remember⁠—” he spoke slowly, and with an effort, “do you remember a cheque coming through the day before yesterday for a hundred pounds, with Sir John Morrison’s signature?”</p>
			<p>“Yes. It came in the morning, rather late.”</p>
			<p>Mike remembered the cheque perfectly well, owing to the amount. It was the only three-figure cheque which had come across the counter during the day. It had been presented just before the cashier had gone out to lunch. He recollected the man who had presented it, a tallish man with a beard. He had noticed him particularly because of the contrast between his manner and that of the cashier. The former had been so very cheery and breezy, the latter so dazed and silent.</p>
			<p>“Why,” he said.</p>
			<p>“It was a forgery,” muttered <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Waller, sitting down heavily.</p>
			<p>Mike could not take it in all at once. He was stunned. All he could understand was that a far worse thing had happened than anything he could have imagined.</p>
			<p>“A forgery?” he said.</p>
			<p>“A forgery. And a clumsy one. Oh it’s hard. I should have seen it on any other day but that. I could not have missed it. They showed me the cheque in there just now. I could not believe that I had passed it. I don’t remember doing it. My mind was far away. I don’t remember the cheque or anything about it. Yet there it is.”</p>
			<p>Once more Mike was tongue-tied. For the life of him he could not think of anything to say. Surely, he thought, he could find <em>something</em> in the shape of words to show his sympathy. But he could find nothing that would not sound horribly stilted and cold. He sat silent.</p>
			<p>“Sir John is in there,” went on the cashier. “He is furious. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke, too. They are both furious. I shall be dismissed. I shall lose my place. I shall be dismissed.” He was talking more to himself than to Mike. It was dreadful to see him sitting there, all limp and broken.</p>
			<p>“I shall lose my place. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke has wanted to get rid of me for a long time. He never liked me. I shall be dismissed. What can I do? I’m an old man. I can’t make another start. I am good for nothing. Nobody will take an old man like me.”</p>
			<p>His voice died away. There was a silence. Mike sat staring miserably in front of him.</p>
			<p>Then, quite suddenly, an idea came to him. The whole pressure of the atmosphere seemed to lift. He saw a way out. It was a curious crooked way, but at that moment it stretched clear and broad before him. He felt lighthearted and excited, as if he were watching the development of some interesting play at the theatre.</p>
			<p>He got up, smiling.</p>
			<p>The cashier did not notice the movement. Somebody had come in to cash a cheque, and he was working mechanically.</p>
			<p>Mike walked up the aisle to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke’s room, and went in.</p>
			<p>The manager was in his chair at the big table. Opposite him, facing slightly sideways, was a small, round, very red-faced man. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bickersdyke was speaking as Mike entered.</p>
			<p>“I can assure you, Sir John⁠—” he was saying.</p>
			<p>He looked up as the door opened.</p>
			<p>“Well, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Jackson?”</p>
			<p>Mike almost laughed. The situation was tickling him.</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Waller has told me⁠—” he began.</p>
			<p>“I have already seen <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Waller.”</p>
			<p>“I know. He told me about the cheque. I came to explain.”</p>
			<p>“Explain?”</p>
			<p>“Yes. He didn’t cash it at all.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t understand you, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Jackson.”</p>
			<p>“I was at the counter when it was brought in,” said Mike. “I cashed it.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
